#LyX 2.0 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 413
\begin_document
\begin_header
\textclass report
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman default
\font_sans default
\font_typewriter default
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100
\font_tt_scale 100

\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_amsmath 1
\use_esint 1
\use_mhchem 1
\use_mathdots 1
\cite_engine basic
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Engineering Emergence and Social Networks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Christopher Perro
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
December 11, 2011
\end_layout

\begin_layout Abstract
Some of today's largest systems are the social networks that connect us
 to people all over the world.
 These systems, which are really systems of systems, started out looking
 much different than they do today.
 A major player in the transformation of networks like Facebook and Twitter
 has been the phenomenon called Emergence.
 Unexpected, often highly desirable effects often emerge from these large,
 distributed systems with large amounts of human interaction.
 In fact, the emergent behaviors have come to be defining factors in the
 systems in which they emerge.
 The big question then remains: Can these emergent behaviors be build into
 new systems?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Chapter
Introduction
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
One of the most fascinating topics in Systems Engineering, and more particularly
, Systems of Systems Engineering is that of Emergence.
 It is one of those topics that seems to have it all: positive effects,
 negative effects, neutral effects, minor effects, enormous effects, paradoxes,
 philosophy, axioms, and so much more.
 Emergence is the defining factor in what makes many of our systems today
 useful, valuable, and unique.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Some of the best examples today of systems of systems that display and take
 advantage of emergence are social networks.
 It is one of those areas that sees the rise and fall of many competitors
 trying desperately to win the war of the top social network.
 The list of those that have faded away vastly outweighs the list of the
 relevant.
 Systems like Myspace, Google+, Orkut, and Friendster all have vied and
 fallen to networks like Facebook and Twitter.
 Whether they realize it or not, each user of these systems is a key player
 in the system (which is a system of a systems) the emergence that the system
 exhibits.
 In fact, the users themselves are one of the primary reasons that the emergence
 exists at all.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
The logical question to then ask is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

can emergent behavior be engineered into a system?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 The quick answer depends largely upon the definition of emergence that
 is used.
 Some definitions make a clear distinction that emergent behavior can be
 predicted from component behavior.
 Other definitions, however, make no such reference.
 Nonetheless, even if the former definition is selected, perhaps something
 else can be analyzed in attempt to predict emergent behavior (outside of
 the behavior of the subcomponents).
 This is certainly the viewpoint of the optimist.
 It is absolutely natural to try to contain and engineer something with
 such wide-ranging, far-reaching effects.
 As of yet, though, this has been out of reach.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Chapter
Emergence, In General
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Emergence is a key trait of many system of systems.
 It is best described by David Fischer in his paper 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

An Emergent Perspective on Inter-operation in Systems of Systems
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 He says that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Emergent behaviors are actions that cannot be localized to any single component
 of the system but instead produce effects (often in form of services) that
 arise from the cumulative action and interactions of many independent acting
 components
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 It is therefore safe to deduce a few things about emergence.
 First, it is a property only of large systems of systems.
 Secondly (and relatedly), it can be used as a defining factor for whether
 a system is a true system of systems.
 Finally, the key force behind emergence is the interaction or communication
 between system elements.
 Charles Keating reiterates Fischer's definition by saying 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Emergence is a principle in classical systems theory that generally suggests
 that system properties (patterns, capabilities, structure, behaviors) develop
 from the interaction of system elements
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Keating goes on to quote Aristotle to create a poignant analogy: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

...the whole is more than the sum of its parts
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
There is a bit more to the definition of emergence than just effects that
 arise from the interaction of system components.
 Both Fischer and Keating go on in their definitions and describe a few
 very important aspects of emergence.
 Fischer says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Emergence is the unavoidable result of interactions among autonomous entities
 and thus will occur in systems of systems whether by accident of intention.
 Emergence can be instrumental in the success or failure of systems of systems
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Emergent system properties are entirely neutral.
 They can try to be designed into a system or pop up unexpectedly.
 They can also be really good things, really bad things, or even things
 that have no effect.
 Finally, Keating gives a slightly disturbing caveat to emergence.
 He says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

These emergent properties are no ascribable to any of the system elements
 and cannot be understood/predicted from the properties of the system elements
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 For engineers, this is a scary thought.
 This leaves open the possibility that a system could be designed from other
 other systems and even though the plan was well thought out and verified,
 an emergence effect could pop up and possibly ruin the system.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
The interaction between system components that emergence speaks to can be
 described by both influence and cascading effects.
 These two ideas are the means by which the communication travels among
 system members.
 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Influence is any mechanism by which one entity interacts with another in
 a way that challenges the physical, informational, or emotional state of
 the other
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Influence has a broad definition, and rightly so.
 If influence is considered in the realm of human interaction (which can
 be a major component of any system) it can be seen why it is so powerful.
 Take, for example, the smiley face emoticon.
 Its presence or absence can greatly influence the direction of conversation.
 In an SMS conversation a reply to a girlfriend or boyfriend of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

You're crazy :)
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 may lead to a simple giggle or smile.
 However, removing the emoticon could influence the other party to pick
 a fight even if the sending party meant the response in a playful way.
 Influence can covey just as broad of a range of attributes.
 It can be subtle, glaring, positive, negative, intentional, and accidental.
 It fits well with emergence.
 Influence can also propagate through a system.
 That is where cascade effects come into play.
 The easiest way to describe this property of emergence is with a simple,
 familiar example.
 Dad comes home from work in a bad mood.
 He is then short and snippy with his wife when she greets him at home.
 The wife, who up until this point was in a good mood, is now in a bad mood.
 She then proceeds to scold her child for making too much noise (which up
 until this point has not bothered her).
 The child is now in a bad mood for being yelled at.
 And a near silent household has emerged since everyone is mad at everyone
 else.
 That sums up cascading effects, influence, and an emergent behavior all
 in one.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
The previous two examples also supply evidence for other properties of emergence.
 The Coherent Structure and Tight Coupling of the family definitely helped
 produce the emergent behavior.
 But perhaps the largest player in the two example are what Fischer describes
 as Semantic Issues.
 In the examples the tone and intention of the language used between two
 parties are the semantic issues.
 These semantic issues would seem to be localized to the human domain, but
 they are not.
 In the world of the Internet, information sharing, and information analysis
 semantic issues creep up in transmitting, codifying, and reasoning amongst
 non-human entities.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
The first task after defining emergence is being able to detect it.
 Due to the nature of emergent behaviors, they can lay dormant for days,
 or months, or even years.
 A large system of systems could be stable for several releases before the
 organization that maintains it decides that a new system should be rolled
 up underneath it.
 The addition of this new system could very easily bring about a rise of
 some emergent behavior.
 Thus, the ability to analyze a large system for dormant (or visible) emergent
 behavior is highly desirable.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Chapter
Detecting Emergence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
After understanding what emergence actually is and all of the things it
 implies, the challenge becomes being able to detect it in systems of systems.
 The first thing to make clear is that detecting emergence and predicting
 emergence are two entirely different things.
 Detecting emergence involves analyzing a system in a certain way to be
 able to see emergence that may not have made itself apparent yet or solidly
 defining the prospect of emergent behavior.
 Predicting emergent behaviors (and/or trying to build them into a system)
 is another topic entirely; one which as will be discussed later may not
 even be possible.
 Several methods have been researched and reported on that may shed light
 on detecting emergent behaviors in a system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Peter Haglich and Laura Pullum researched and reported on a method of attempting
 to detect emergence in social networks.
 They posed that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Multiple interconnected networks can be considered a system of System's
 with the collective networks comprising the larger system - individual
 interacting networks with each network is also a system in its own right
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 They chose social networks because 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Detecting emergent behavior in social networks can help determine when or
 if they are about to change in a radical way
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Together, Haggish and Pullum conducted some analysis using semi-boolean
 algebra to achieve their end.
 They concede that their approach only provides the ability to discover
 explicit emergent behavior.
 That is, emergent behaviors can be deduced when all of the variables in
 a system are known.
 Further research must be done using equation modeling to make the approach
 more useful; most systems have many hidden or unknown variables.
 This extension of their approach would prove to be very useful if/when
 that happens.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
In another paper Jochen Fromm postulates that the scientific method could
 be used to help better understand emergent behaviors in systems of systems.
 He believes the problem is that these large systems are 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

...predictable and regular at certain scales, but unpredictable and irregular
 at other scales
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 More specifically, Fromm finds that at small scales, the systems with the
 larger system behaves exactly as designed.
 No unexpected behavior can be found.
 However, once systems begin to be combined with other systems and the view
 of the system becomes much higher, unpredictable behaviors emerge.
 Fromm's details his solutions: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

There is no formal approach or methodology which would be a solution to
 the problems of 'engineering emergence' or 'engineering self-organizing
 systems', but there is a well-known general method based on a stepwise
 iterative enhancement which bridges the micro-macro distinction - the classic
 scientific method
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Fromm goes on to say that since the scientific method has yet to really
 be used in the discipline of engineering that it is a viable route to explore.
 Fromm posits that engineering and science are actually trying to do the
 same thing: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

find a simple rule for a complex pattern
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 He also concedes that his method falls a bit short when dealing with social
 or natural systems since they are usually a result of some sort of evolution.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Lastly, Jorge Louca, John Symons, David Rodrigues, and Andre Morais also
 set out to find a method for detecting what they have called 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

emergent fingerprints
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 in system (social network systems more specifically).
 They believe 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

...that socially networked behavior is not merely the composition of constituent
 individuals
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 To detect the emergent fingerprints in any system, they seek to model that
 system and the communication interfaces therein.
 The authors outline two interesting case studies: one on cicadas and another
 on the idea of a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

smart mob
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 What is most interesting are the two conclusions that they draw from the
 case studies.
 First, they 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

conclude that knowing only the links between the nodes of the communications
 network is enough to characterize the flow of information in these specific
 social situations
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Second, 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

the combination of patterns, identified at different abstraction levels,
 is a way of identifying social structures determined by communication processes
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 These conclusions help shift the focus of system definition off of the
 actual subsystems and onto the communication between those systems.
 The communication, not components, becomes the focus of detecting emergent
 behavior.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
When discussing social networks, the last method seems to provide the most
 success.
 Since a large amount of the structure of social networks lies in the communicat
ion paths and linkages, models are the natural route to go.
 The notion of the smart mob is something that has been seen fairly regularly
 in today's active social networks.
 Hopefully, in the future, system designers can model their networks in
 effort to try to predict any emergent behaviors.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Chapter
Emergence in Social Networks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Twitter
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Over the past few years the Internet has seen the rise (and fall) of many
 social networks.
 They need almost no introduction.
 Words like 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Facebook
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 and 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

twitter
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 are known almost the world over.
 They are massively distributed systems of systems.
 They make for the perfect systems to analyze for two very important reasons.
 First, their main purpose is communication (one of our keys to detecting
 emergent behavior).
 Secondly, and most importantly, humans play a major role in these systems.
 The creativity, unpredictability, and ingenuity of the human mind is one
 of the biggest contributors to emergent behavior.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Twitter is a social network that was created in March of 2006.
 In the simplest of terms, each user, identified by a user-name, can broadcast
 messages of up to 160 characters at a time.
 The most common way of receiving these messages is by 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

following
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 other peoples message feeds.
 The initial idea was to simply broadcast whatever was on your mind at that
 moment in time.
 Since it's inception, twitter has ballooned to over 300 million users who
 tweet more than 300 million tweets a day.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
The first indication that emergence has played a part in this system is
 the fact that anyone even remotely knowledgeable of Twitter knows that
 it is so much more than the description above.
 The first thing to emerge from Twitter was the idea of 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tweeting
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 links to other websites.
 And, hand in hand with that, tweeting links to photos (basically on another
 website).
 This seems like a perfectly natural progression.
 Not only can one now tweet what's on their mind, bu they can also show
 their followers what they are doing (or where they are or who they're with
 or what they are looking at...).
 The thought/ability to tweet links lead news websites to tweet links to
 newly posted articles.
 The ability mention someone in a tweet has enabled users to have line by
 line conversations with each other and even celebrities! The system has
 enabled an outlet for celebrities/sports players/politicians connect randomly
 with their followers.
 This, however, didn't come without its problems.
 The anonymity of the Internet enables anyone to claim they are Michael
 Jordan.
 Twitter of course responded with the ability to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

verify
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 accounts, but people are still undoubtedly fooled everyday.
 Twitter has also become a free means of distributing useful services.
 Take, for example, the MTA.
 Twitter provides the MTA a stable Internet infrastructure to disseminate
 information like subway line availability and delays.
 People can now receive useful information and check up on their friends
 all in one place.
 Finally, Twitter has become an invaluable tool in aiding and organizing
 Louca, Symons, Rodrigues, and Morais' smart mobs.
 As this paper is being written, the various Occupy groups across the country
 (and world) are using Twitter not only to spread their message, but also
 to help protesters track the movements of Occupy groups and get updates
 on the latest information.
 The simple ability to query topics in tweets has turned a social system
 where people broadcast their thoughts into a system that is key to the
 survival and spread of protest movements all over the world.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Facebook
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Facebook also started out as a fairly simple social network.
 Each user would have a profile that contained the user's name, picture,
 school information, and a simple 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

about me
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Users would then 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

friend
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 each other to gain access to their profiles.
 In addition to seeing another user's profile, a user could also write on
 their friend's wall.
 That is, leave a message for their friend (and all the friends said friend
 had) to see.
 It was a simple, relatively small system.
 Facebook started out exclusively for the students at Harvard University.
 After subsequent releases to just colleges (user's were required to have
 a valid college email address), then to special invites from college only
 users, to then the entire world, Facebook has grown to over 800 million
 users.
 Facebook has not only grown in terms of user base.
 It has also grown significantly in terms of functionality and emergence
 has played a key role here as well.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
One of the first emergent behaviors here also has to do with photos.
 Facebook has gone from a system that simply lets a user upload a defining
 profile picture to one that allows users to upload and store every digital
 photo that they have ever taken.
 Beyond even that, the system allows users to 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

tag
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 other people in photos.
 Facebook is almost starting to become people's main source of photo backup.
 If your computer crashes and you lose all of your data (photos included),
 you can at least be assured that you have all of them saved to Facebook
 (albeit a copy of much lesser quality).
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
The proliferation of playing games on Facebook has also emerged as the years
 have gone by.
 At one time the Facebook game FarmVille had 80 million players (that's
 one in ten users!).
 It seems that a natural progression from simple social networking is using
 that base infrastructure to implement distributed game play.
 This is a principle that had been previously exploited by many a Xbox and
 Playstation game.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Two ideas that have emerged from mass posting on walls are Facebook Marketplace
 and Events.
 The users of Facebook at one point decided that it would be a great idea
 to use Facebook to try and sell items they no longer have a use for.
 Facebook Marketplace was born out of this idea.
 Instead of posting a status about an item someone is looking to sell, or
 posting on your friends wall asking them if you are interesting in buying
 an item, users can go to a central marketplace.
 This way, they receive greater product distribution.
 Facebook events also became a natural extension of the infrastructure.
 It's common for a group of friends to want to meet up at a certain location
 for a particular occasion.
 Again, instead of visiting each friend's profile and posting something
 on their wall about an event, a module was created to make the process
 easier.
 Users can now create events and invite people to them.
 Any time the event information is updated, or someone makes a comment about
 the event, all of the invited friends are notified.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
The largest emergent behavior that has come from Facebook must be the existence
 of non-traditional pages.
 It was, in the past, that each page represented one user.
 Facebook now has pages for celebrities, businesses, and groups.
 Small businesses that can't afford the time or money to maintain a website
 of their own can very easily create a Facebook page and populate it with
 their physical address (if there is one), their products/services, their
 contact information, and can even communicate with possible customers.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Finally, Facebook has been instrumental in organizing smart mobs, just like
 Twitter.
 One can point to a recent example for Facebook as well.
 The spark that set off the massive Egyptian protests in January of 2011
 was started by a Facebook group.
 The protesters then heavily relied on Facebook and Twitter to organize
 and rally themselves.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Chapter
Difficulties of Emergence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Any system that is a mix of massive amounts of hardware, software, and millions
 of people can be considered complex.
 However, adding the topic of emergence to a system makes things even more
 so.
 Its hard to believe that philosophy could make its way into any engineering
 paper, but it is something that must be considered when dealing with emergence.
 As time goes by and more and more social networks pop up, the frame of
 reference for these networks must be raised, and the idea of a system of
 social networks must start to be considered.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
The Paradox of Emergence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Many of the definitions of emergence and emergent behavior create a paradoxical
 understanding of the subject.
 Recall Keating's definition of emergence: 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Emergence is a principle in classical systems theory that generally suggests
 that system properties (patterns, capabilities, structure, behaviors) develop
 from interaction of system elements.
 These emergent properties are not ascribable to any of the system elements
 and cannot be understood/predicted from the properties of the system elements
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 This definition leads to many paradoxical questions.
 Jochen Fromm raises most of them.
 He asks 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

...
 can we design a predictable system with unpredictable properties - or is
 it a contradiction in itself?
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 This is a logical question.
 Engineering is supposed to be the logical application of science.
 Why bother taking the time to carefully design systems if random, unpredictable
 properties may emerge and ruin the system? Fromm goes on to say 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

...the phenomenon of 'emergence' is at odds with any attempt to engineer and
 design a system
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Fischer and Emergence
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
David Fisher has a slightly different take on emergence.
 He believes that 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Emergent behavior is often observed but poorly understood, especially in
 the context of automated systems
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 His paper on Emergence and Systems of Systems attempts to remove the mystery
 and pessimism that other authors converge to.
 He directly addresses some of the mystery and paradox mentioned above.
 Fisher says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Because we don't understand enough about the processes by which local actions
 and interactions with neighbors are composed to produce emergent behavior,
 we often are surprised at the resulting emergent global effects.
 This has encouraged the belief that emergent behavior is synonymous with
 unexpected, unanticipated, unpredictable, and undesirable behavior
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 Fisher uses the rest of his paper to explain why and how emergent behavior
 can be tamed and predictable.
 His explanation offers some solace that emergence isn't totally out of
 the hands of the systems engineer while casually admitting that some aspects
 of emergent behavior are not wholly understood.
 He says 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

...
 emergent behavior arises naturally and predictably from influence mechanisms,
 cascade effects, and other emergent phenomena that are inherent in systems
 of systems
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Fisher has come up with five maxim-like findings.
 They are:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Because they cannot control one another, autonomous entities can achieve
 goals that are not local to themselves only by increasing their influence
 through cooperative interactions with others.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Emergent composition is often poorly understood and sometimes misunderstood
 because it has few analogies in traditional systems engineering.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Even in the absence of accidents, tight coupling can ensure that a system
 of systems is unable to satisfy its objectives.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
If it is to remain scalable and affordable no matter how large it may become,
 a system's cost per constituent must grow less linearly with its size.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Enumerate
Delay is a critical aspect of systems of systems.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Of the five maxims, numbers two and five are the most important for this
 discussion.
 Number two was just discussed.
 Number five 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

may be obvious, but (is) too often ignored
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 as John Morley puts it.
 The idea of delay is something that is often overlooked.
 This is partly due to the fact that delay tends to have a negative connotation.
 However, since delay is inherent in communication, and communication is
 one of the hallmarks of emergence, delay can play a huge role in emergence.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Network of Social Networks
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Norm Augustine anecdotally described how perspective plays a large part
 in how System of Systems are defined.
 He relates how a fuel pump is a system, which itself is part of the larger
 system that is the airplane engine, which itself is part of a larger system
 that is the whole airplane, which itself is part of the larger system that
 is airplane infrastructure which itself is part of the larger system that
 is the transportation infrastructure, etc.
 This same sort of logic can be applied to social networks.
 At one of the larger scales, each modern day social network (Facebook,
 Twitter, Reddit, Google+) also now has the ability to interact not only
 with each other, but also other systems like news websites.
 As the system and system view become larger and higher a few things happen.
 First, the probability of emergent behavior manifesting increases.
 Second, the ability to analyze the system as a whole becomes much harder.
 Modeling one social network is hard enough, let alone two or more.
 Behaviors start to become mysterious again because no one has had the time
 or ability to do any analysis.
 The technological world we live in changes and adapts so quickly that by
 the time any analysis or research is done, there is a good possibility
 that the technology is either no longer relevant or changed dramatically.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Emergence and Philosophy
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Another difficulty associated with emergence seems somewhat out of place
 in an engineering paper.
 The idea that philosophy plays a role in emergence in systems of systems
 seems a bit strange.
 Keating does his best to describe why he thinks so.
 He contends 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Understanding our own philosophical leanings, as well as those of others
 critical to the SoS effort, is crucial.
 This is particularly the case when we are dealing with complex system problems
 that involve multiple perspectives, disciplines, and potentially conflicting
 values/beliefs.
 Ultimately, philosophical disposition will establish the acceptable range
 of decisions, actions, and interpretations necessary to deal with emergence
 inherent in SoS
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

.
 This idea brings about two very important points.
 The first is what Keating directly says.
 Our own view of life, the world, engineering, of everything will play an
 important part in how we respond to emergence (since remember, Keating
 believes emergence is mostly out of our control).
 Are we the type of people to just hope that a system behaves according
 to how it should piece for piece and lament if emergent behavior shows?
 If we are that controlling we may tighten the coupling of the system in
 effort to rid the system of the emergent behavior.
 This will just cause more of Fisher's accidents to occur (which will lead
 to more coupling) which will ultimately lead to an extremely coupled (and
 useless) system.
 However, we might approach emergence with a cautious optimism, excited
 as to how it could shape our present system.
 If this were the case we might do our best to try to predict, or at least
 guide, the emergence from the system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Something else can be drawn from Keating's discussion of philosophy and
 emergence, especially how it pertains to social networks.
 When people are major components of a system, each individual and their
 philosophy on life are important.
 Philosophy affects how people influence others and take advantage of the
 system.
 For example, a recent Facebook hack was discovered that enabled anyone
 to anyone else's private photos.
 The individual who discovered this could have taken several courses of
 action.
 He/She could have done:
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Nothing
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Told just a few friends about it (who may have then spread the world more
 aggressively)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Spread the word aggressively to the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

world
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Informed Facebook of the bug right away
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Informed Facebook after exploiting the 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

feature
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 a bit
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
The person in question must have gone either the route of telling a few
 people, or telling the world, since the problem still exists and Facebook
 is actively trying to fix it (while suspending accounts taking advantage
 of the hack).
 The collective philosophy of the users of a community converge to become
 the philosophy of the community itself.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Chapter
Conclusion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Emergence is a fascinating topic.
 It has the ability to literally make or break a large system of systems.
 Emergence can be a good thing or a bad thing, a predictable or unpredictable
 thing (depending on the definition you ascribe to), and most definitely
 due to the interactions between system components.
 The key to emergent behavior is most definitely the communication between
 various system nodes.
 The influence that they can exert on each other and have cascade through
 the system lead to emergent behaviors.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Since communication is the key factor in emergence, the easiest place to
 observe emergent behaviors is in modern day social networks.
 Networks like Facebook and Twitter have evolved substantially from the
 day that they went lives many years ago.
 The networks themselves have been largely manipulated due to the users
 of the systems themselves.
 The two systems mentioned, in particular, have largely benefited from this
 emergent behaviors.
 They have gained more users, more advertisers, and thus, more profits.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Paragraph
Emergence doesn't come without its set of difficulties though.
 Even using an optimistic definition of the topic still leaves some aspect
 of mystery.
 The pessimistic definition leaves little hope to attempt to engineer emergence
 into any system.
 It even leaves little hope in trying to predict it.
 Until these ultra-large scale systems are more thoroughly analyzed and
 understood, emergent behaviors present in them will remain a bit mysterious.
 Finally, since these systems are ever-growing and every-changing, doing
 any sort of long term analysis seems futile.
 The better route may be trying to analyze the human participants within
 the system since their individual philosophies also play a large part in
 the emergence that will manifest in the system.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\labelwidthstring Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
key "key-1"

\end_inset

Fisher, David A.
 An Emergent Perspective on Interoperation in Systems of Systems.
 Tech.
 CMU/SEI, 2006.
 Print.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\labelwidthstring Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
key "key-1"

\end_inset

Fromm, Jochen.
 On Engineering and Emergence.
 Tech.
 Kassel, Germany: Distributed Systems Group, Kassel University.
 Print.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\labelwidthstring Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
key "key-3"

\end_inset

Haglich, Peter, Christopher Rouff, and Laura Pullum.
 Detecting Emergence in Social Networks.
 Tech.
 IEEE International Conference on Social Computing, 2010.
 Print.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\labelwidthstring Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
key "key-5"

\end_inset

Keating, Charles B.
 "Emergence in System of Systems." System of Systems Engineering: Innovations
 for the 21st Century.
 By Mohammad Jamshidi.
 John Wiley & Sonds, 2008.
 169-90.
 Print.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\labelwidthstring Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
key "key-6"

\end_inset

Louca, Jorge, John Symons, David Rodrigues, and Andre Morais.
 Emergence in Social Networks: Modeling the Intentional Properties of Multi-Agen
t Systems.
 Tech.
 Print.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Bibliography
\labelwidthstring Bibliography
\begin_inset CommandInset bibitem
LatexCommand bibitem
key "key-7"

\end_inset

Morley, John.
 "Library | Five Maxims about Emergent Behavior in Systems of Systems." Software
 Engineering Institute.
 Software Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon, 01 June 2006.
 Web.
 01 Dec.
 2011.
 <http://www.sei.cmu.edu/library/abstracts/news-at-sei/feature2200606.cfm>.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
